---
layout: post
title: Cynicism
categories: 
    - Life
last_modified_at: 2020-05-04T23:33:00+01:00
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
---

People often don't realise, but making silly comments (even in thought) about how your coworker's plans for becoming an artist, or your friend's efforts to do more recycling, are doomed to fail is not making you look cool.<!--more-->  Behaving cynically, at best, achieves not much more than communicating non-constructive pessimism. At worst, makes us - and those around us - chronically close-minded. 

When you behave like that, it prevents you to put yourself in the shoes of that other person and asking yourself, why are they thinking this way? What do they know that I don't? Or worse, it might prevent you from engaging in meaningful conversation, in which you may learn a thing or two.

Wikipedia defines [Cynicism (contemporary)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cynicism_(contemporary)) as 

> an attitude characterized by a general distrust of 'others' motives

and goes further on to say that 

> a cynic may have a general lack of faith or hope in people motivated by ambition, desire, greed, gratification, materialism, goals, and opinions that a cynic perceives as vain, unobtainable, or ultimately meaningless and therefore deserving of ridicule or admonishment.

One, including myself, could easily think of motivations that might be worthy of _ridicule or admonishment_. The problem is when ridicule or admonishment become the main reaction for anything sounding remotely naive, vain or unobtainable.

Cynicism is like sarcasm, but you actually believe in it.

I can see how facing a lot of perceived unfairness in life can lead one to develop the cynic reflex. It might be some sort of coping mechanism. Dysfunctional families, communities and societies are, apparently, fertile ground for it. I grew up in a society that cynic attitudes are commonplace. Later, when I experienced an environment with low cynicism, I realised how much collective interactions and social cohesion suffered from those attitudes. The low cynicism environment felt way more prone for the exchange of ideas and knowledge building. I wouldn't be able to tell now which one comes first: open mindedness or low cynicism, as these are highly correlated. But this is for sure, one feeds on the other. They might as well be just manifestations of the same thing. 

Cynics might have a smart-sounding tune to when they act, but no one really likes them around for long. Police yourself for cynic thoughts. If you have them often, every occurrence that you detect and curb is a step toward a more open and healthier mind. 